# 3.9 Problems

3.1 Consider the electrode reaction $\mathrm{O}+n e \rightleftharpoons \mathrm{R}$. Under the conditions that $C_{\mathrm{O}}^{*}=C_{\mathrm{R}}^{*}= 1 \mathrm{mM}, k^{0}=10^{-7} \mathrm{~cm} / \mathrm{s}, \alpha=0.3$, and $n=1$ :
(a) Calculate the exchange current density, $j_{0}=i_{0} / A$, in $\mu \mathrm{A} / \mathrm{cm}^{2}$.
(b) Draw a current density-overpotential curve for this reaction for current densities up to $600 \mu \mathrm{~A} / \mathrm{cm}^{2}$ anodic and cathodic. Neglect mass-transfer effects.
(c) Draw $\log |j|$ vs. $\eta$ curves (Tafel plots) for the current ranges in (b).
3.2 (a) Derive (3.4.30) from (3.4.29).
(b) Use (3.4.30) and a spreadsheet to repeat Problem 3.1(b,c), including the effects of mass transfer. Assume $m_{\mathrm{O}}=m_{\mathrm{R}}=10^{-3} \mathrm{~cm} / \mathrm{s}$.
3.3 Use a spreadsheet to calculate and plot current vs. potential and $\ln$ (current) vs. potential for the general $i-\eta$ expression in (3.4.30).
(a) Show a table of results [potential, current, $\ln$ (current), overpotential] and graphs of $i$ vs. $\eta$ and $\ln |i|$ vs. $\eta$ for $A=1 \mathrm{~cm}^{2} ; C_{\mathrm{O}}^{*}=1 \times 10^{-3} \mathrm{~mol} / \mathrm{cm}^{3} ; C_{\mathrm{R}}^{*}=1 \times 10^{-5} \mathrm{~mol} / \mathrm{cm}^{3}$; $n=1 ; \alpha=0.5 ; k^{0}=1.0 \times 10^{-4} \mathrm{~cm} / \mathrm{s} ; m_{\mathrm{O}}=0.01 \mathrm{~cm} / \mathrm{s} ; m_{\mathrm{R}}=0.01 \mathrm{~cm} / \mathrm{s} ; E^{0^{\prime}}=-0.5 \mathrm{~V}$ vs. NHE.
(b) Show the $i$ vs. $E$ curves for a range of $k^{0}$ values with the other parameters as in (a). At what values of $k^{0}$ are the curves indistinguishable from the nernstian case?
(c) Show the $i$ vs. $E$ curves for a range of $\alpha$ values with the other parameters as in (a).
3.4 Consider $1 e$ electrode reactions for which $\alpha=0.50$ and $\alpha=0.10$. Calculate the relative error in current resulting from the use in each case of:
(a) The linear $i-\eta$ characteristic for overpotentials of 10,20 , and 50 mV .
(b) The Tafel (totally irreversible) relationship for overpotentials of 50, 100, and 200 mV .
3.5 The exchange current density, $j_{0}$, for $\mathrm{Pt} / \mathrm{Fe}(\mathrm{CN})_{6}^{3-}(2.0 \mathrm{mM}), \mathrm{Fe}(\mathrm{CN})_{6}^{4-}(2.0 \mathrm{mM})$, $\mathrm{NaCl}(1.0 \mathrm{M})$ at $25^{\circ} \mathrm{C}$ is reported to be $2.0 \mathrm{~mA} / \mathrm{cm}^{2}(112)$. The transfer coefficient, $\alpha$, for this system is about 0.50 . Calculate:
(a) The value of $k^{0}$.
(b) The expected $j_{0}$ for a solution 0.1 M each in the two complexes.
(c) The charge-transfer resistance of a $0.1-\mathrm{cm}^{2}$ electrode in a solution $10^{-4} \mathrm{M}$ each in ferricyanide and ferrocyanide.
3.6 (a) Show that for a first-order homogeneous reaction $\mathrm{A} \xrightarrow{k_{\mathrm{f}}} \mathrm{B}$, the average lifetime of A is $1 / k_{\mathrm{f}}$.
(b) Derive an expression for the average lifetime of a collection of electroreactant molecules, O , when they are "at the electrode surface" and able to undergo the
heterogeneous reaction $\mathrm{O}+e \xrightarrow{k_{\mathrm{f}}} \mathrm{R}$. Assume that O can react when it is within distance $d$ of the surface. Consider a hypothetical system in which the solution phase extends only $d$ (perhaps 1.0 nm ) from the surface.
(c) What value of $k_{\mathrm{f}}$ would be needed for a lifetime of 1 ms ? Are lifetimes as short as 1 ns possible?
3.7 Discuss the mechanism by which the potential of a $0.1-\mathrm{cm}^{2}$ platinum electrode becomes poised by immersion into a solution of Fe (II) and Fe (III) in 1 M HCl . Approximately how much charge is required to shift the electrode potential by 100 mV ? Assume $C_{\mathrm{d}}=20 \mu \mathrm{~F} / \mathrm{cm}^{2}$. Why does the potential become uncertain at low concentrations of Fe(II) and Fe(III), even if the ratio of their concentrations is held near unity? Does this experimental fact reflect thermodynamic considerations? Do your answers to these issues apply to the establishment of potential at an ion-selective electrode?
3.8 The following data were obtained for the reduction of species $R$ to $R^{-}$in a stirred solution at a $0.1-\mathrm{cm}^{2}$ electrode. The solution contained 0.01 MR and $0.01 \mathrm{MR}^{-}$.

| $\eta(\mathrm{mV})$ | -100 | -120 | -150 | -500 | -600 |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| $i(\mu \mathrm{~A})$ | 45.9 | 62.6 | 100 | 965 | 965 |

Calculate: $i_{0}, k^{0}, \alpha, R_{\mathrm{ct}}, i_{l, \mathrm{c}}, m_{\mathrm{O}}, R_{\mathrm{mt}}$
3.9 From results in Figure 3.4.5 for $10^{-2} \mathrm{M} \mathrm{Mn}(\mathrm{III})$ and $10^{-2} \mathrm{M} \mathrm{Mn}(\mathrm{IV})$, estimate $j_{0}$ and $k^{0}$. What is the predicted $j_{0}$ for a solution 1 M in both $\mathrm{Mn}(\mathrm{III})$ and $\mathrm{Mn}(\mathrm{IV})$ ?
3.10 The magnitude of the solvent term $\left(1 / \varepsilon_{\mathrm{op}}-1 / \varepsilon_{\mathrm{s}}\right)$ is about 0.5 for most solvents. Calculate the value of $\lambda_{\mathrm{o}}$ and the free energy of activation (in eV ) due only to solvation for a molecule of radius 0.7 nm spaced 0.7 nm from an electrode surface.
3.11 Derive (3.5.63).
3.12 Show from the equations for $D_{\mathrm{O}}(\lambda, \mathbf{E})$ and $D_{\mathrm{R}}(\lambda, \mathbf{E})$ that the equilibrium energy of a system, $\mathbf{E}_{\text {eq }}$, is related to the bulk concentrations, $C_{\mathrm{O}}^{*}$ and $C_{\mathrm{R}}^{*}$, and $\mathbf{E}^{0^{\prime}}$ by an expression resembling the Nernst equation. How does this expression differ from the Nernst equation written in terms of potentials, $E_{\text {eq }}$ and $E^{0^{\prime}}$ ? How do you account for the difference?
3.13 Derive (3.5.40) using (3.3.8) and (3.4.6) as expressed for Marcus kinetics, plus (3.5.32).


[^0]:    1 An elementary reaction describes an actual, discrete chemical event. Many chemical reactions, as written, are not elementary, because the transformation of products to reactants involves several steps. The steps are the elementary reactions that comprise the mechanism for the overall process.

[^1]:    2 The energy surface ideally comprehends the positions of all atoms affecting the energetics of the processes of interest, not just those defining A and B . Also relevant are atoms in immediate and more remote solvation spheres and atoms that might be involved in ion-pairing, adsorption sites, or other forms of close association with either or both primary participants, A and B . Thus, the "reactant zone" on the surface is a "hollow" describing A in its normal range of low-energy configurations, and as found in its normal range of "habitats," for example in a solution or adsorbed on a surface. Likewise, the "product zone" is a different hollow corresponding to B in its usual habitats.

[^2]:    3 We are using standard thermodynamic quantities here (Section 2.1.5), because the free energy and the entropy of a species are concentration dependent. The rate constant is not concentration dependent in dilute systems; thus, the argument that leads to (3.1.9) needs to be developed in the context of a standard state of concentration. The choice of standard state is not critical to the discussion. To simplify notation, we omit the superscript " 0 " from $\Delta E^{\ddagger}, \Delta H^{\ddagger}, \Delta S^{\ddagger}$, and $\Delta G^{\ddagger}$, but normally understand them to be referred to the standard state of concentration.

[^3]:    4 Since $k T / h$ has units of $\mathrm{s}^{-1}$ and the exponential is dimensionless, (3.1.14) is dimensionally correct for a first-order rate constant. For a second-order reaction, the equilibrium expression leading to (3.1.10) would place the concentrations of two reactants in the denominator on the left side and the activity coefficient for each of those species divided by the standard-state concentration, $C^{0}$, in the numerator on the right. Thus, $C^{0}$ no longer divides out altogether and is carried to the first power into the denominator of the final expression. Since it normally has a unit value (usually 1 M ), its presence has no effect numerically, but it does dimensionally. The overall result is to create a prefactor having a numeric value equal to $k T / h$, but with units of $\mathrm{M}^{-1} \mathrm{~s}^{-1}$, as required. This point is often omitted in applications of transition state theory to processes more complicated than unimolecular decay. See Section 2.1.5 and reference (2).

[^4]:    5 The energy required to take a charge $q$ through a difference in potential $\Delta E$ is $q \Delta E$. The charge on a mole of electrons is $-F$, where $F$ is the Faraday constant; thus, the energy change for the electrons is $-F \Delta E(\mathrm{~J} / \mathrm{mol})$.

[^5]:    6 In other electrochemical literature, $k_{\mathrm{f}}$ and $k_{\mathrm{b}}$ are designated as $k_{\mathrm{c}}$ and $k_{\mathrm{a}}$ or as $k_{\mathrm{ox}}$ and $k_{\mathrm{red}}$. Sometimes, kinetic equations are written in terms of a complementary transfer coefficient, $\beta=1-\alpha$. If one sees $\beta$ in kinetic expressions, it is important to discern whether it is meant to be what we call $\alpha$ or what we call $1-\alpha$. See also footnote 10 .