# 4.7 Problems

4.1 Show that all three terms on the right-hand side of the one-dimensional modified Nernst-Planck equation, (4.1.9), have units of flux ( $\mathrm{mol} \mathrm{cm}^{-2} \mathrm{~s}^{-1}$ ).
4.2 Consider the electrolysis of a 0.10 M NaOH solution at platinum electrodes, where the reactions are:

$$
\begin{array}{ll}
2 \mathrm{OH}^{-} \rightarrow 1 / 2 \mathrm{O}_{2}+\mathrm{H}_{2} \mathrm{O}+2 e & \text { (anode) } \\
2 \mathrm{H}_{2} \mathrm{O}+2 e \rightarrow \mathrm{H}_{2}+2 \mathrm{OH}^{-} & \text {(cathode) }
\end{array}
$$

Show the balance sheet for the system operating at steady state. Assume $20 e$ are passed in the external circuit per unit time, and use the $\lambda_{0}$ values in Table 2.3.2 to estimate transference numbers.
4.3 Consider the electrolysis of a solution containing $0.1 \mathrm{M} \mathrm{Fe}\left(\mathrm{ClO}_{4}\right)_{3}$ and $0.1 \mathrm{M} \mathrm{Fe}\left(\mathrm{ClO}_{4}\right)_{2}$ at platinum electrodes:

$$
\begin{array}{ll}
\mathrm{Fe}^{2+} \rightarrow \mathrm{Fe}^{3+}+e & \text { (anode) } \\
\mathrm{Fe}^{3+}+e \rightarrow \mathrm{Fe}^{2+} & \text { (cathode) }
\end{array}
$$

Assume that both salts are completely dissociated, that the $\lambda$ values for $\mathrm{Fe}^{3+}, \mathrm{Fe}^{2+}$, and $\mathrm{ClO}_{4}^{-}$are equal, and that $10 e$ are passed in the external circuit per unit time. Show the balance sheet for the steady-state operation of this system.
4.4 For a given electrochemical system to be described by equations involving linear diffusion and semi-infinite boundary conditions, the cell wall must be at least five "diffusion lengths" away from the electrode. For a substance with $D=10^{-5} \mathrm{~cm}^{2} / \mathrm{s}$, what distance between the working electrode and the cell wall is required for a 100 -s experiment?
4.5 The mobility, $u_{j}$, is related to the diffusion coefficient, $D_{j}$, by (4.1.11).
a) From the mobility data in Table 2.3.2, estimate the diffusion coefficients of $\mathrm{H}^{+}, \mathrm{I}^{-}$, and $\mathrm{Li}^{+}$at $25^{\circ} \mathrm{C}$.
b) Write the equation for the estimation of $D_{j}$ from the $\lambda_{j}$-value.
4.6 Using the procedure of Section 4.4.2, derive Fick's second law for spherical diffusion, (4.4.18). [Hint: Because of the different areas through which diffusion occurs at $r$ and at $r+d r$, it is more convenient to obtain the change of concentration in an element of width $d r$ by considering the number of moles diffusing per second rather than the flux.]


[^0]:    1 The Nernst-Planck equation encompasses only terms for diffusion and migration. In this book, we use the label modified Nernst-Planck equation for the more general transport equation, including a term for convection.