


> [!Question]
> 1.1 Consider each of the following electrode/solution interfaces. Write the equations for the electrode reactions that occur when the potential is moved progressively (1) negatively and (2) positively from the open-circuit potential, until the background limit is reached. Next to each reaction write the approximate potential for the reaction in V vs. SCE (assuming the reaction is reversible). Sketch the entire $i-E$ curve for the system.
> a) $\mathrm{Pt} / \mathrm{Cu}^{2+}(0.01 \mathrm{M}), \mathrm{Cd}^{2+}(0.01 \mathrm{M}), \mathrm{H}_{2} \mathrm{SO}_{4}(1 \mathrm{M})$
> b) $\mathrm{Pt} / \mathrm{Sn}^{2+}(0.01 \mathrm{M}), \mathrm{Sn}^{4+}(0.01 \mathrm{M}), \mathrm{HCl}(1 \mathrm{M})$
> c) $\mathrm{Hg} / \mathrm{Cd}^{2+}(0.01 \mathrm{M}), \mathrm{Zn}^{2+}(0.01 \mathrm{M}), \mathrm{HCl}(1 \mathrm{M})$




1.2 A rotating disk electrode of area $0.30 \mathrm{~cm}^{2}$ is used for the reduction of $0.010 \mathrm{M} \mathrm{Fe}^{3+}$ to $\mathrm{Fe}^{2+}$ in $1 \mathrm{M} \mathrm{H}_{2} \mathrm{SO}_{4}$. Given $D_{\mathrm{O}}$ for $\mathrm{Fe}^{3+}$ at $5.2 \times 10^{-6} \mathrm{~cm}^{2} / \mathrm{s}, v=0.010 \mathrm{~cm}^{2} / \mathrm{s}$, and the expression for $m_{\mathrm{O}}$ in footnote 29, calculate the limiting current for the reduction for a disk rotation rate of $10 \mathrm{r} / \mathrm{s}$. Include units on variables during calculation and give units of current in the answer.
1.3 A solution of volume $50 \mathrm{~cm}^{3}$ contains $2.0 \times 10^{-3} \mathrm{M} \mathrm{Fe}^{3+}$ and $1.0 \times 10^{-3} \mathrm{M} \mathrm{Sn}^{4+}$ in 1 M HCl . This solution is examined by voltammetry at a rotating platinum disk electrode of area $0.30 \mathrm{~cm}^{2}$. At the rotation rate employed, both $\mathrm{Fe}^{3+}$ and $\mathrm{Sn}^{4+}$ have mass-transfer coefficients, $m$, of $10^{-2} \mathrm{~cm} / \mathrm{s}$. (a) Calculate the limiting current for the reduction of $\mathrm{Fe}^{3+}$ under these conditions. (b) A current-potential scan is taken from +1.3 to -0.40 V vs. NHE. Make a labeled, quantitatively correct, sketch of the $i-E$ curve that would be obtained. Assume that no changes in the bulk concentrations of $\mathrm{Fe}^{3+}$ and $\mathrm{Sn}^{4+}$ occur during this scan and that all electrode reactions are nernstian.
1.4 The conductivity of a 0.1 M KCl solution is $0.013 \Omega^{-1} \mathrm{~cm}^{-1}$ at $25^{\circ} \mathrm{C}$. (a) Calculate the solution resistance between two parallel planar platinum electrodes of $0.1 \mathrm{~cm}^{2}$ area placed 3 cm apart in this solution. (b) A reference electrode with a Luggin capillary is placed the following distances from a planar platinum working electrode ( $A=0.1 \mathrm{~cm}^{2}$ ) in $0.1 \mathrm{M} \mathrm{KCl}: 0.05,0.1,0.5,1.0 \mathrm{~cm}$. What is $R_{\mathrm{u}}$ in each case? (c) Repeat the calculations in part (b) for a spherical working electrode of the same area. [In (b) and (c), assume that a large counter electrode is employed.]


> [!Question]
> 1.5 A $0.1-\mathrm{cm}^{2}$ electrode with $C_{\mathrm{d}}=20 \mu \mathrm{~F} / \mathrm{cm}^{2}$ is subjected to a potential step under conditions where $R_{\mathrm{u}}$ is 1,10 , or $100 \Omega$. In each case, what is the cell time constant, and what is the time required for the double-layer charging to be $95 \%$ complete?




1.6 Suppose the potential step in Problem 1.5 is from $E_{1}=-0.1 \mathrm{~V}$ to $E_{2}=-0.6 \mathrm{~V}$ vs. $\mathrm{Ag} / \mathrm{AgCl}$ and the PZC is -0.3 V vs. $\mathrm{Ag} / \mathrm{AgCl}$. (a) Calculate the charge on the working electrode at $E_{1}$ and $E_{2}$. Do the same for a PZC at (b) +0.1 V and (c) -0.1 V vs. SCE.


> [!Question]
> 1.7 For the electrode in Problem 1.5, what nonfaradaic current will flow (neglecting any transients) when the electrode is subjected to linear sweeps at $0.02,1,20 \mathrm{~V} / \mathrm{s}$ ?






1.8 Consider the nernstian half-reaction:

$$
\mathrm{A}^{3+}+2 e \rightleftharpoons \mathrm{~A}^{+} \quad E_{\mathrm{A}^{3+} / \mathrm{A}^{+}}^{0^{\prime}}=-0.500 \mathrm{~V} \text { vs. } \mathrm{NHE}
$$

The $i-E$ curve for a solution at $25^{\circ} \mathrm{C}$ containing $2.00 \mathrm{mM} \mathrm{A}^{3+}$ and $1.00 \mathrm{mM} \mathrm{A}^{+}$in excess electrolyte shows $i_{l, \mathrm{c}}=4.00 \mu \mathrm{~A}$ and $i_{l, \mathrm{a}}=-2.40 \mu \mathrm{~A}$. (a) What is $E_{1 / 2}(\mathrm{~V} \nu s$. NHE)? (b) Sketch the expected $i-E$ curve for this system. (c) Sketch the "log plot" (analogous to Figure 1.3.2b) for the system.
1.9 Consider the system in Problem 1.8 under the conditions that a complexing agent, $\mathrm{L}^{-}$, which reacts with $\mathrm{A}^{3+}$ according to the reaction

$$
\mathrm{A}^{3+}+4 \mathrm{~L}^{-} \rightleftharpoons \mathrm{AL}_{4}^{-} \quad K=10^{16}
$$

is added to the system. For a solution at $25^{\circ} \mathrm{C}$ containing only $2.0 \mathrm{mM} \mathrm{A}^{3+}$ and $0.1 \mathrm{M} \mathrm{L}^{-}$ in excess inert electrolyte, answer parts (a), (b), and (c) in Problem 1.8. (Assume $m_{\mathrm{O}}$ is the same for $\mathrm{A}^{3+}$ and $\mathrm{AL}_{4}^{-}$)
1.10 Derive the current-potential relationship under the conditions of Section 1.3.2 for a system where R is initially present at a concentration $C_{\mathrm{R}}^{*}$ and $C_{\mathrm{O}}^{*}=0$. Consider both O and R soluble. Sketch the expected $i-E$ curve.
1.11 Suppose a mercury pool of $1 \mathrm{~cm}^{2}$ area is immersed in a 0.1 M sodium perchlorate solution. How much charge (order of magnitude) would be required to change its potential by 1 mV ? How would this be affected by a change in the electrolyte concentration to $10^{-2} \mathrm{M}$ ? Why?
1.12 Rearrangement of equation (1.3.17) yields the following expression for $i$ as a function of $E$, which is convenient for calculating $i-E$ curves for nernstian reactions:

$$
\begin{equation*}
i / i_{l}=\left\{1+\exp \left[(n F / R T)\left(E-E_{1 / 2}\right)\right]\right\}^{-1} \tag{1.11.1}
\end{equation*}
$$

a) Derive this expression.
b) Consider the half-reaction $\mathrm{Ru}\left(\mathrm{NH}_{3}\right)_{6}^{3+}+e \rightleftharpoons \mathrm{Ru}\left(\mathrm{NH}_{3}\right)_{6}^{2+}$. The $E^{0}$ for this reaction is given in Appendix C. A steady-state $i-E$ curve is obtained with a solution containing $10 \mathrm{mM} \mathrm{Ru}\left(\mathrm{NH}_{3}\right)_{6}^{3+}$ and 1 M KCl (as supporting electrolyte). The working electrode is a Pt disk of area $0.10 \mathrm{~cm}^{2}$ operating under conditions where $m=10^{-3} \mathrm{~cm} / \mathrm{s}$ for both Ru species. Use a spreadsheet to calculate and plot the expected $i-E$ curve.
1.13 a) Derive an expression for $i$ as a function of $E$, analogous to that in Problem 1.12, from (1.3.21), using (1.3.16) as the definition of $E_{1 / 2}$, for use in solutions that contain both components of a redox couple.
b) Consider the same system as in Problem 1.12, but for a solution containing 10 mM $\mathrm{Ru}\left(\mathrm{NH}_{3}\right)_{6}^{3+}$ and $5.0 \mathrm{mM} \mathrm{Ru}\left(\mathrm{NH}_{3}\right)_{6}^{2+}$ in 1 M KCl . Use a spreadsheet to calculate the $i-E$ curve and plot the results.
c) What is $\eta_{\mathrm{mt}}$ at a cathodic current density of $0.48 \mathrm{~mA} / \mathrm{cm}^{2}$ ?
d) Estimate $R_{\mathrm{mt}}$.


