# 1.8 The Literature of Electrochemistry

Under this heading in the second edition, there was an extensive summary of the English-language literature of electrochemistry as it existed in 2001. Prominent books and monographs were listed in several categories. Review series and key journals were identified. The present reader might find that summary useful, even now.

In this edition, an equivalent summary is not provided. Mainly, the authors desire to save the space for other matters, but also relevant is that publication patterns have changed greatly since 2001, especially for articles on original research. A summary is, in many respects, no longer practical.

However, it seems still worthwhile to list general reference sources (including compilations of data), sources on laboratory techniques, and the main review series, which give rise to many references in this text.

### 1.8.1 Reference Sources

1) Bard, A. J., G. Inzelt, and F. Scholz, Eds., "Electrochemical Dictionary," 2nd ed., Springer, Heidelberg, 2012.
2) Bard, A. J., and H. Lund, Eds., "Encyclopedia of the Electrochemistry of the Elements" (18 volumes), Marcel Dekker, New York, 1973-1986.
3) Bard, A. J., R. Parsons, and J. Jordan, Eds., "Standard Potentials in Aqueous Solutions," Marcel Dekker, New York, 1985.
4) Conway, B. E., "Electrochemical Data," Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1952.
5) Horvath, A. L., "Handbook of Aqueous Electrolyte Solutions: Physical Properties, Estimation, and Correlation Methods," Ellis Horwood, Chichester, UK, 1985.
6) Janz, G. J., and R. P. T. Tomkins, "Nonaqueous Electrolytes Handbook" (2 volumes), Academic, New York, 1972.
7) Meites, L., and P. Zuman, "Electrochemical Data," Wiley, New York, 1974.
8) Meites, L., and P. Zuman et al., "CRC Handbook Series in Organic Electrochemistry" (6 volumes), CRC, Boca Raton, FL, 1977-1983.
9) Meites, L., and P. Zuman et al., "CRC Handbook Series in Inorganic Electrochemistry" (8 volumes), CRC, Boca Raton, FL, 1980-1988.
10) Parsons, R., "Handbook of Electrochemical Data," Butterworths, London, 1959.
11) Zemaitis, J. F., D. M. Clark, M. Rafal, and N. C. Scrivner, "Handbook of Aqueous Electrolyte Thermodynamics: Theory and Applications," Design Institute for Physical Property Data (for the American Institute of Chemical Engineers), New York, 1986.
12) Zoski, C. G., Ed., "Handbook of Electrochemistry," Elsevier, Amsterdam, 2007.

### 1.8.2 Sources on Laboratory Techniques

In this book, general and specialized sources on electrochemical phenomena and theory are cited in subsequent chapters; however, books on laboratory techniques generally are not. The following list is offered now as an aid to the reader:

1) Adams, R. N., "Electrochemistry at Solid Electrodes," Marcel Dekker, New York, 1969.
2) Gileadi, E., E. Kirowa-Eisner, and J. Penciner, "Interfacial Electrochemistry-An Experimental Approach," Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1975.
3) Kissinger, P. T., and W. R. Heineman, Eds., "Laboratory Techniques in Electroanalytical Chemistry," 2nd ed., Marcel Dekker, New York, 1996.
4) Sawyer, D. T., A. Sobkowiak, and J. L. Roberts, Jr., "Electrochemistry for Chemists," 2nd ed., Wiley, New York, 1995.
5) Scholz, F., Ed., "Electroanalytical Methods," 2nd ed., Springer, Berlin, 2010.
6) Zoski, C. G., Ed., "Handbook of Electrochemistry," Elsevier, Amsterdam, 2007.

### 1.8.3 Review Series

A number of review series dealing with electrochemistry and related areas exist. Volumes are published from time to time and contain chapters written by authorities. ${ }^{57,58}$

1) "Advances in Electrochemical Science and Engineering" ( 18 volumes), H. Gerischer, C. W. Tobias, R. C. Alkire, D. M. Kolb, J. Lipkowski, P. N. Ross, L. A. Kibler, P. N. Bartlett, and M. T. Koper, Eds., Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, Germany, 1990-2018.

[^32]2) "Advances in Electrochemistry and Electrochemical Engineering" (13 volumes), P. Delahay, C. W. Tobias, and H. Gerischer, Wiley, New York, 1961-1984.
3) "Comprehensive Treatise of Electrochemistry" (10 volumes), E. Yeager, J. O'M. Bockris, B. E. Conway, S. Sarangapani, R. E. White, S. Srinivasan, and Yu. A. Chizmadzhev, Eds., Plenum, New York, 1984.
4) "Electroanalytical Chemistry" ( 27 volumes), A. J. Bard, I. Rubinstein, and C. G. Zoski, Eds., Taylor and Francis, Boca Raton, FL, 1966-2017.
5) "Electrochemistry (Specialist Periodical Reports)" (10 volumes), G. J. Hills (Vols. 1-3), H. R. Thirsk (Vols. 4-7), and D. Pletcher (Vols. 8-10), Senior Reporters, The Chemical Society, London, 1971-1985.
6) "Encyclopedia of Electrochemistry" (11 volumes), A. J. Bard and M. Stratmann, Series Eds., Wiley-VCH, Wenheim, Germany, 2002-2007.
7) "Modern Aspects of Electrochemistry" (60 volumes), J. O'M. Bockris, B. E. Conway, R. E. White, C. G. Vayenas, Series Eds., Springer, New York, 1954-2022.
8) "Techniques of Electrochemistry" (3 volumes), E. Yeager and A. J. Salkind, Eds., Wiley-Interscience, New York, 1972-1978.