# 2.5 Lab Note: Practical Use of Reference Electrodes

Section 2.1.8 introduces the important attributes of reference electrodes and the most practical systems. This note is devoted to two matters relevant to daily work.

## 2.5.1 Leakage at the Reference Tip

Ionic conduction is required at the reference tip for a functioning electrode; therefore, one must expect leakage of both ions and solvent through the tip in both directions. The important thing is that any leakage remain inconsequential-not affecting the electrode process at the working electrode, the integrity of the working solution, or the properties of the reference electrode. Often, this is the reality.

However, one must be wary of complications. For example, $\mathrm{Ag} / \mathrm{AgCl}$ reference electrodes leak small amounts of water into nonaqueous electrolytes, and that contamination can degrade the test solution unacceptably. A more insidious problem comes from traces of $\mathrm{AgCl}_{2}^{-}$and $\mathrm{AgCl}_{3}^{2-}$ leaked into aqueous working solutions. These species can make their way to the working electrode, where they can be electrodeposited, contaminating the surface. In experiments sensitive to the surface structure and surface composition of the working electrode, this effect can be serious.

A double junction can be helpful toward preventing leakage. For example, in a cell with a Pt working electrode and an $\mathrm{Ag} / \mathrm{AgCl}$ reference electrode, this arrangement would take the form,

$$
\begin{gather*}
\mid \leftarrow \text { double junction } \rightarrow \mid \\
\mathrm{Ag} / \mathrm{AgCl} / \mathrm{KCl}\left(\text { sat }^{\prime} \mathrm{d}\right) / \text { test solution/test solution } / \mathrm{Pt} \tag{2.5.1}
\end{gather*}
$$

where the "test solution" is the solution of interest at the working electrode. The double junction consists of the reference tip itself, a captured sample of test solution, and a second ionically conducting barrier, such as a frit. It can be achieved simply by slipping a piece of tubing, plugged at one end by a porous frit and filled with test solution, over the reference electrode tip. With a double junction, leakage from the reference electrode occurs initially into the trapped test solution. Eventually, the contamination might make its way through the frit into the compartment with the working electrode, but this takes time-ideally, enough time for the experiments of interest to be accomplished without serious interference.

Leakage in the other direction, from the working solution into the reference electrode, can cause precipitation within the tip. This process can gradually reduce the quality of ionic contact, sometimes to the point where the tip can no longer fulfill its electrical role. The reference electrode may begin to drift and become unreliable, or the high impedance at a clogged tip may introduce unacceptable noise. Such behavior often marks the end of usable life for the reference electrode.

## 2.5.2 Quasireference Electrodes

For nonaqueous media, many workers use QREs, ${ }^{32}$ because aqueous reference electrodes tend to degrade a nonaqueous working solution, and because nonaqueous reference electrodes

[^24][Section 2.1.8(e)] are inconvenient, especially with volatile solvents. A QRE is often just a metal wire, Ag or Pt, used in the expectation that, in experiments where there is essentially no change in the bulk composition of the test solution, the potential of this wire, although unknown, will not change appreciably during a series of measurements.

One might ask how a QRE can accept the current involved in a measurement of potential [Attribute 5 in Section 2.1.8(b)], since there is no electrochemical equilibrium capable of charge delivery. The answer is that the QRE is stabilized by its own double-layer capacitance, which can deliver or receive the tiny amounts of charge required by contemporary instrumentation for measurements of potential in three-electrode cells. But there are limits to the stability. One can expect a QRE to drift over the course of a long series of measurements as the charge on its double layer changes.

Attempts have been made to develop poised QREs. An alternative (80) is to employ a reference electrode in which Fc and $\mathrm{Fc}^{+}$are immobilized at a known concentration ratio in a polymer layer on a conducting surface. Quite favorable performance is reported (81) for a QRE in which polypyrrole is electrodeposited on Pt or stainless steel and then left in a partially oxidized state. Silver wires have been oxidized in aqueous base, covering them with AgO , in the hope that they maintain better stability through a poising effect.

The actual potential of a QRE vs. a true reference electrode must be calibrated before reporting potentials; uncalibrated data are meaningless. Typically, calibration is achieved vs. the $\mathrm{Ag} / \mathrm{AgCl}$ or SCE simply by measuring vs. the QRE (e.g., by SSV or CV) the standard or formal potential of a couple whose potential is already known vs. $\mathrm{Ag} / \mathrm{AgCl}$ or SCE under the same conditions. There are two approaches:

1) One might add an "internal reference redox system" to the solution to be investigated (82). Ferrocene/ferrocenium ( $\mathrm{Fc} / \mathrm{Fc}^{+}$) is commonly used, since it has reversible behavior in many solvents (83). One just adds Fc to the test solution and measures the position of its reversible voltammetric response vs. the QRE. Of course, it is important that the internal reference not interfere with the electrochemistry of primary interest.
2) Many investigations are based on systems that can furnish the internal reference without addition of any other substance. If the CV remains well behaved and involves a couple whose standard potential vs. $\mathrm{Ag} / \mathrm{AgCl}$ or SCE is already well known, one can calibrate the QRE directly from the CV. A good example is found in Figure 7.5.2, where there are CV waves for two couples, both with well-known formal potentials vs. good reference electrodes.
A QRE is not suitable in experiments where changes in the composition of the bulk solution can cause concomitant variations in the potential of the QRE.