# 2.7 Problems

2.1 Devise electrochemical cells in which the following reactions could be made to occur. If liquid junctions are necessary, note them in the cell schematic appropriately, but neglect their effects.
(a) $\mathrm{H}_{2} \mathrm{O} \rightleftharpoons \mathrm{H}^{+}+\mathrm{OH}^{-}$
(b) $2 \mathrm{H}_{2}+\mathrm{O}_{2} \rightleftharpoons 2 \mathrm{H}_{2} \mathrm{O}$
(c) $2 \mathrm{PbSO}_{4}+2 \mathrm{H}_{2} \mathrm{O} \rightleftharpoons \mathrm{PbO}_{2}+\mathrm{Pb}+4 \mathrm{H}^{+}+2 \mathrm{SO}_{4}^{2-}$
(d) $\mathrm{An} \bar{\bullet}+\mathrm{TMPD} \stackrel{\dagger}{\bullet} \rightleftarrows \mathrm{An}+\mathrm{TMPD}$ (in acetonitrile), where An and $\mathrm{An} \bar{\bullet}$ are anthracene and its anion radical, and TMPD and TMPD ${ }^{\bullet}$ are $N, N, N^{\prime}, N^{\prime}$-tetramethyl- $p$-phenylenediamine and its cation radical (structures in Figure 1). Use anthracene potentials for DMF solutions given in Appendix C.3.
(e) $2 \mathrm{Ce}^{3+}+2 \mathrm{H}^{+}+\mathrm{BQ} \rightleftharpoons 2 \mathrm{Ce}^{4+}+\mathrm{HQ}$ (aqueous), where BQ is $p$-benzoquinone and HQ is $p$-hydroquinone (Figure 1).
(f) $\mathrm{Ag}^{+}+\mathrm{I}^{-} \rightleftharpoons \mathrm{AgI}$ (aqueous)
(g) $\mathrm{Fe}^{3+}+\mathrm{Fe}(\mathrm{CN})_{6}^{4-} \rightleftharpoons \mathrm{Fe}^{2+}+\mathrm{Fe}(\mathrm{CN})_{6}^{3-}$ (aqueous)
(h) $\mathrm{Cu}^{2+}+\mathrm{Pb} \rightleftharpoons \mathrm{Pb}^{2+}+\mathrm{Cu}$ (aqueous)
(i) $\mathrm{An} \bar{\bullet}+\mathrm{BQ} \rightleftharpoons \mathrm{BQ} \bar{\bullet}+\mathrm{An}$ (in DMF), where $\mathrm{BQ}, \mathrm{An}$, and $\mathrm{An} \bar{\bullet}$ are defined above and $\mathrm{BQ}^{-}$is the anion radical of $p$-benzoquinone. Use BQ potentials in acetonitrile given in Appendix C.3.
Which half-reactions take place at the electrodes in each cell? What is the standard cell potential in each case? Which electrode is negative? Would the cell operate electrolytically or galvanically in carrying out a net reaction from left to right? Be sure your decisions accord with chemical intuition.
2.2 Several hydrocarbons and carbon monoxide have been studied as possible fuels for use in fuel cells. From thermodynamic data in references [5-8, 15], derive $E^{0}$ for each of the following reactions at $25^{\circ} \mathrm{C}$ :
(a) $\mathrm{CO}(g)+\mathrm{H}_{2} \mathrm{O}(l) \rightarrow \mathrm{CO}_{2}(g)+2 \mathrm{H}^{+}+2 e$
(b) $\mathrm{CH}_{4}(g)+2 \mathrm{H}_{2} \mathrm{O}(l) \rightarrow \mathrm{CO}_{2}(g)+8 \mathrm{H}^{+}+8 e$
(c) $\mathrm{C}_{2} \mathrm{H}_{6}(g)+4 \mathrm{H}_{2} \mathrm{O}(l) \rightarrow 2 \mathrm{CO}_{2}(g)+14 \mathrm{H}^{+}+14 e$
(d) $\mathrm{C}_{2} \mathrm{H}_{2}(g)+4 \mathrm{H}_{2} \mathrm{O}(l) \rightarrow 2 \mathrm{CO}_{2}(g)+10 \mathrm{H}^{+}+10 e$

Even though a reversible emf could not be established (Why not?), which half-cell would ideally yield the highest cell voltage when coupled with the standard oxygen half-cell in
acid solution? Which of the fuels above would yield the highest net work per mole of fuel oxidized? Which would give the most net work per gram? Which would release the least $\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ per unit of net work?
2.3 Devise a cell in which the following is the overall cell reaction ( $T=298 \mathrm{~K}$ ):

$$
2 \mathrm{Na}^{+}+2 \mathrm{Cl}^{-} \rightarrow 2 \mathrm{Na}(\mathrm{Hg})+\mathrm{Cl}_{2}(\text { aqueous })
$$

where $\mathrm{Na}(\mathrm{Hg})$ symbolizes the amalgam. Is the reaction spontaneous or not? What is the standard free energy change? Take the standard free energy of formation of $\mathrm{Na}(\mathrm{Hg})$ as $-85 \mathrm{~kJ} / \mathrm{mol}$. From a thermodynamic standpoint, another reaction should occur more readily at the cathode of your cell. What is it? It is observed that the reaction written above takes place with good current efficiency. Why? Could your cell have a commercial value?
2.4 What are the cell reactions and their emfs in the following systems? Are the reactions spontaneous? Assume that all systems are aqueous.
(a) $\mathrm{Ag} / \mathrm{AgCl} / \mathrm{K}^{+}, \mathrm{Cl}^{-}(1 \mathrm{M}) / \mathrm{Hg}_{2} \mathrm{Cl}_{2} / \mathrm{Hg}$
(b) $\mathrm{Pt} / \mathrm{Fe}^{3+}(0.01 \mathrm{M}), \mathrm{Fe}^{2+}(0.1 \mathrm{M}), \mathrm{HCl}(1 \mathrm{M}) / / \mathrm{Cu}^{2+}(0.1 \mathrm{M}), \mathrm{HCl}(1 \mathrm{M}) / \mathrm{Cu}$
(c) $\mathrm{Pt} / \mathrm{H}_{2}(1 \mathrm{bar}) / \mathrm{H}^{+}, \mathrm{Cl}^{-}(0.1 \mathrm{M}) / / \mathrm{H}^{+}, \mathrm{Cl}^{-}(0.1 \mathrm{M}) / \mathrm{O}_{2}(0.2 \mathrm{bar}) / \mathrm{Pt}$
(d) $\mathrm{Pt} / \mathrm{H}_{2}(1 \mathrm{bar}) / \mathrm{Na}^{+}, \mathrm{OH}^{-}(0.1 \mathrm{M}) / / \mathrm{Na}^{+}, \mathrm{OH}^{-}(0.1 \mathrm{M}) / \mathrm{O}_{2}(0.2 \mathrm{bar}) / \mathrm{Pt}$
(e) $\mathrm{Ag} / \mathrm{AgCl} / \mathrm{K}^{+}, \mathrm{Cl}^{-}(1 \mathrm{M}) / / \mathrm{K}^{+}, \mathrm{Cl}^{-}(0.1 \mathrm{M}) / \mathrm{AgCl} / \mathrm{Ag}$
(f) $\mathrm{Pt} / \mathrm{Ce}^{3+}(0.01 \mathrm{M}), \mathrm{Ce}^{4+}(0.1 \mathrm{M}), \mathrm{H}_{2} \mathrm{SO}_{4}(1 \mathrm{M}) / /$

$$
\mathrm{Fe}^{2+}(0.01 \mathrm{M}), \mathrm{Fe}^{3+}(0.1 \mathrm{M}), \mathrm{HCl}(1 \mathrm{M}) / \mathrm{Pt}
$$

2.5 Consider the cell in part (f) of Problem 2.4. What would the composition of the system be at the end of a galvanic discharge to an equilibrium condition? What would the cell potential be? What would the potential of each electrode be vs. NHE? vs. SCE? Assume equal volumes on both sides.
2.6 Devise a cell for evaluating the solubility product of $\mathrm{PbSO}_{4}$. Calculate the solubility product from the appropriate $E^{0}$ values ( $T=298 \mathrm{~K}$ ).
2.7 Obtain the dissociation constant of water from the parameters of the cell constructed for reaction (a) in Problem 2.1 ( $T=298 \mathrm{~K}$ ).
2.8 Consider the cell:

$$
\mathrm{Cu} / \mathrm{M} / \mathrm{Fe}^{3+}, \mathrm{Fe}^{2+}, \mathrm{H}^{+} / / \mathrm{Cl}^{-} / \mathrm{AgCl} / \mathrm{Ag} / \mathrm{Cu}^{\prime}
$$

Would the cell potential be independent of the identity of M (e.g., graphite, gold, platinum) as long as M is chemically inert? Use electrochemical potentials to prove your point.
2.9 Given the half-cell of the standard hydrogen electrode,

$$
\begin{aligned}
& \mathrm{Pt} / \mathrm{H}_{2} \quad(a=1) / \mathrm{H}^{+} \quad(a=1)(\text { soln }) \\
& \mathrm{H}_{2} \rightleftharpoons 2 \mathrm{H}^{+} \quad(\mathrm{soln})+2 e(\mathrm{Pt})
\end{aligned}
$$

Show that although the emf of the cell half-reaction is taken as zero, the potential difference between the platinum and the solution, that is, $\phi^{\mathrm{Pt}}-\phi^{\mathrm{S}}$, is not zero.
2.10 Devise a thermodynamically sound basis for obtaining the standard potentials for new half-reactions by taking linear combinations of other half-reactions. As two examples, calculate $E^{0}$ values for
(a) $\quad \mathrm{CuI}+e \rightleftharpoons \mathrm{Cu}+\mathrm{I}^{-}$
(b) $\quad \mathrm{O}_{2}+2 \mathrm{H}^{+}+2 e \rightleftharpoons \mathrm{H}_{2} \mathrm{O}_{2}$
given the following half-reactions and values for $E^{0}$ vs. NHE at $T=298 \mathrm{~K}$ :

$$
\begin{array}{ll}
\mathrm{Cu}^{2+}+2 e \rightleftharpoons \mathrm{Cu} & 0.340 \mathrm{~V} \\
\mathrm{Cu}^{2+}+\mathrm{I}^{-}+e \rightleftharpoons \mathrm{CuI} & 0.86 \mathrm{~V} \\
\mathrm{O}_{2}+4 \mathrm{H}^{+}+4 e \rightleftharpoons 2 \mathrm{H}_{2} \mathrm{O} & 1.229 \mathrm{~V} \\
\mathrm{H}_{2} \mathrm{O}_{2}+2 \mathrm{H}^{+}+2 e \rightleftharpoons 2 \mathrm{H}_{2} \mathrm{O} & 1.763 \mathrm{~V}
\end{array}
$$

2.11 Transference numbers are sometimes measured by the Hittorf method, illustrated in this problem. Consider the three-compartment cell:

$$
\begin{array}{ccc}
\boldsymbol{L} & \boldsymbol{C} & \boldsymbol{R} \\
\ominus \mathrm{Ag} / \mathrm{AgNO}_{3}(0.100 \mathrm{M}) / / \mathrm{AgNO}_{3}(0.100 \mathrm{M}) / / \mathrm{AgNO}_{3}(0.100 \mathrm{M}) / \mathrm{Ag} \bigoplus
\end{array}
$$

where the double slashes (//) signify sintered glass disks that divide the compartments and prevent mixing, but not ionic movement. The volume of $\mathrm{AgNO}_{3}$ solution in each compartment $(L, C, R)$ is 25.00 mL . An external power supply is connected to the cell with the polarity shown, and current is applied until 96.5 C have passed, causing Ag to deposit on the left Ag electrode and Ag to dissolve from the right Ag electrode.
(a) How many grams of Ag have deposited on the left electrode? How many mmol of Ag have deposited?
(b) If the transference number for $\mathrm{Ag}^{+}$were 1.00 (i.e., $t_{\mathrm{Ag}^{+}}=1.00, t_{\mathrm{NO}_{3}^{-}}=0.00$ ), what would the concentrations of $\mathrm{Ag}^{+}$be in the three compartments after electrolysis?
(c) Suppose the transference number for $\mathrm{Ag}^{+}$were 0.00 (i.e., $t_{\mathrm{Ag}^{+}}=0.00, t_{\mathrm{NO}_{3}^{-}}=1.00$ ), what would the concentrations of $\mathrm{Ag}^{+}$be in the three compartments after electrolysis?
(d) In an actual experiment like this, it is found experimentally that the concentration of $\mathrm{Ag}^{+}$in the anode compartment $R$ has increased to 0.121 M . Calculate $t_{\mathrm{Ag}^{+}}$and $t_{\mathrm{NO}_{3}^{-}}$.
2.12 Suppose one wants to determine the contribution of electronic (as opposed to ionic) conduction through doped AgBr , a solid electrolyte. A cell is prepared with a film of AgBr between two Ag electrodes, each of mass 1.00 g , that is, $\ominus \mathrm{Ag} / \mathrm{AgBr} / \mathrm{Ag} \oplus$. After passage of 200 mA through the cell for 10.0 min , the cell was disassembled, and the cathode was found to have a mass of 1.12 g . If Ag deposition is the only faradaic process that occurs at the cathode, what fraction of the current through the cell represents electronic conduction in AgBr ?
2.13 Calculate the individual junction potentials at $T=298 \mathrm{~K}$ on either side of the salt bridge in (2.3.43) for the first two concentrations in Table 2.3.3. What is the sum of the two potentials in each case? How does it compare with the corresponding entry in the table?
2.14 Estimate the junction potentials for the following situations ( $T=298 \mathrm{~K}$ ):
(a) $\mathrm{HCl}(0.1 \mathrm{M}) / \mathrm{NaCl}(0.1 \mathrm{M})$
(b) $\mathrm{HCl}(0.1 \mathrm{M}) / \mathrm{NaCl}(0.01 \mathrm{M})$
(c) $\mathrm{KNO}_{3}(0.01 \mathrm{M}) / \mathrm{NaOH}(0.1 \mathrm{M})$
(d) $\mathrm{NaNO}_{3}(0.1 \mathrm{M}) / \mathrm{NaOH}(0.1 \mathrm{M})$
2.15 One often finds pH meters with direct readout to 0.001 pH unit. Comment on the accuracy of these readings in making comparisons of pH from test solution to test solution. Comment on their meaning in measurements of small changes in pH in a single solution (e.g., during a titration).
2.16 The following values of $k_{\mathrm{Na}^{+}, j}^{\mathrm{pot}}$ are typical for interferents $j$ at a sodium-selective glass electrode: $\mathrm{K}^{+}, 0.001 ; \mathrm{NH}_{4}^{+}, 10^{-5} ; \mathrm{Ag}^{+}, 300 ; \mathrm{H}^{+}, 100$. Calculate the concentrations of each interferent that would cause a $10 \%$ error when the concentration of $\mathrm{Na}^{+}$is estimated to be $10^{-3} \mathrm{M}$ from a potentiometric measurement. Assume that activity coefficients are unity.
2.17 Would $\mathrm{Na}_{2} \mathrm{H}_{2}$ EDTA be a good ion-exchanger for a polymer membrane electrode? How about $\mathrm{Na}_{2} \mathrm{H}_{2}$ EDTA - R , where R designates a $\mathrm{C}_{20}$ alkyl substituent? Why or why not?
2.18 Comment on the feasibility of developing selective electrodes for the direct potentiometric determination of uncharged substances.
2.19 Consider the exhaust gas analyzer based on the oxygen concentration cell, (2.4.21). The electrode reaction that occurs at high temperature at both $\mathrm{Pt} / \mathrm{ZrO}_{2}+\mathrm{Y}_{2} \mathrm{O}_{3}$ interfaces is

$$
\mathrm{O}_{2}+4 e \rightleftharpoons 2 \mathrm{O}^{2-}
$$

Write the equation that governs the potential of this cell as a function of the pressures, $P_{\text {eg }}$ and $P_{\mathrm{a}}$. What would the cell voltage be when the partial pressure of oxygen in the exhaust gas is $0.01 \mathrm{bar}(1000 \mathrm{~Pa})$ ?
2.20 For the half reaction, $\mathrm{Fe}(\mathrm{III})+e \rightleftharpoons \mathrm{Fe}(\mathrm{II})$ :
(a) Predict the formal potential in $0.1 \mathrm{M} \mathrm{HClO}_{4}$ [a noncomplexing medium for $\mathrm{Fe}(\mathrm{III}) / \mathrm{Fe}(\mathrm{II})]$ using the standard potential from Table C. 1 and activity coefficients from Table 2.1.1.
(b) Using the formal potential given in Table C.2, estimate the ratio $\gamma_{\mathrm{Fe}^{3+}} / \gamma_{\mathrm{Fe}^{2+}}$ in 1 M $\mathrm{HClO}_{4}$. How does it compare with the ratio calculated in a) for $0.1 \mathrm{M} \mathrm{HClO}_{4}$ ? Account in chemical terms for these ratios.
(c) Why are the formal potentials of $\mathrm{Fe}(\mathrm{III}) / \mathrm{Fe}(\mathrm{II})$ in 1 M HCl and 10 M HCl shifted further from the standard potential than in $\mathrm{HClO}_{4}$ ?


[^0]:    1 The discussion in this section rests on a basic understanding of thermodynamic quantities, including enthalpy, $H$, entropy, $S$, and Gibbs free energy, $G$ (often just called free energy), which are typically introduced in general chemistry. The authors assume preparation at that level. There is also mention in this section of standard states, activities, and standard thermodynamic quantities. Section 2.1.5 introduces these concepts.